---
layout: left-menu
title: Calendars
tagline: technical documentation for JDemetra+ using GitHub Pages
description: Basics
---

This scenario presents how to define different kinds of calendars. These
calendars can be applied to the specifications that take into account
country-specific holidays and can be used for detecting and estimating
the calendar effects.

The calendar effects are those parts of the movements in the time series
that are caused by different number of weekdays in calendar months (or
quarters). They arise as the number of occurrences of each day of the
week in a month (or a quarter) differs from year to year. These
differences cause regular effects in some series. In particular, such
variation is caused by a leap year effect because of an extra day
inserted into February every four years. As with seasonal effects, it is
desirable to estimate and remove calendar effects from the time series.

The calendar effects can be divided into a mean effect, a seasonal part
and a structural part. The mean effect is independent from the period
and therefore should be allocated to the trend-cycle. The seasonal part
arises from the properties of the calendar that recur each year. For one
thing, the number of working days of months with 31 calendar days is on
average larger than that of months with 30 calendar days. This effect is
part of the seasonal pattern captured by the seasonal component (with
the exception of leap year effects). The structural part of the calendar
effect remains to be determined by the calendar adjustment. For example,
the number of working days of the same month in different years varies
from year to year.

Both X-12-ARIMA/X-13ARIMA-SEATS and TRAMO/SEATS estimate calendar
effects by adding some regressors to the equation estimated in the
pre-processing part (RegARIMA or TRAMO, respectively). Regressors
mentioned above are generated from the default calendar or the user
defined calendar.

The calendars of JDemetra+ simply correspond to the usual trading days
contrast variables based on the Gregorian calendar, modified to take
into account some specific holidays. Those holidays are handled as
\"Sundays\" and the variables are properly adjusted to take into account
the long term mean effects.

1.  Calendars in JDemetra+ are stored in the *Workspace* window in the
    *Utilities* section. By default, JDemetra+ does not contain any
    county-specific national holidays. The only item available here is
    the *Default* calendar, which assumes that apart from each Saturday
    and Sunday no other days are non-working days. The *Default*
    calendar reflects only usual composition of the weeks in the
    calendar periods (months, quarters).

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image1.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**The *Calendars* section in the *Workspace* window**

2.  To study the default calendar double click on it. The details are
    displayed in three panels, which present the properties settings,
    the actual calendar variables and the spectral graph for the
    selected (by default -- the first one) calendar variable. By
    default, the view shown in the picture below is displayed.

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image2.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**The default view of the default calendar**

3.  In the *Properties* panel the user can try different frequencies, variable type (trading days or working days[^1]) and specify the variable span by defining the start date and a length of the series. The content of the other two panels will be adjusted automatically to these changes.

	For the *Trading days* option seven regression variables are created.
	The usual trading days variables are defined by the following
	transformation: 6 contrast variables
	($number\ of\ Mondays - number\ of\ Sundays$,...) are used with the
	length of periods that handle the leap year effect.

	$$\begin{bmatrix}
	1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & - 1 \\
	0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & - 1 \\
	0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & - 1 \\
	0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & - 1 \\
	0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & - 1 \\
	0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & - 1 \\
	1 & 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 & 1 \\
	\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}
	M \\
	T \\
	W \\
	T \\
	F \\
	\text{Sat} \\
	S \\
	\end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}
	M - S \\
	T - S \\
	W - S \\
	T - S \\
	F - S \\
	Sat - S \\
	\text{Length of periods} \\
	\end{bmatrix}$$

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image3.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**Modification of the initial settings for the Default calendar**

4.  For the usual working days variables two variables are used: one contrast variable and the length of periods.

	$$\begin{bmatrix}
	1 & - \frac{5}{2} \\
	1 & 1 \\
	\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}
	\text{Week} \\
	\text{Weekend} \\
	\end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}
	\text{Contrast week} \\
	\text{Length of periods} \\
	\end{bmatrix}$$

	The transformations used for creating the trading days variables and the working days variables have several advantages. They suppress from the contrast variables the mean and the seasonal effects, which are concentrated in the last variable. So, they lead to less correlated variables.


	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image4.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**The working days variables in the *Default* calendar**

5.  The top-right panel displays the spectrum for the given calendar
     variable. By default, the first variable from the table is shown.
     To change it, click on the calendar variable header.

	 The spectrum presents the series in the frequency domain (X-axis). The
	 peaks in the spectrum indicate the frequency of cyclical movements
	 with periodicity less than two months, which are present in the time
	 series. The periodicity of a phenomenon at frequency $f$ is
	 $\frac{2\pi}{f}$. It means that for a monthly time series the seasonal
	 frequencies are:
	 $\frac{\pi}{6},\ \frac{\pi}{3},\ \frac{\pi}{2},\ \frac{2\pi}{3},\ \frac{5\pi}{6},\ \pi$
	 (which are equivalent to cycles per year i.e. in the case of a monthly
	 series, the frequency $\frac{\pi}{3}$ corresponds to a periodicity of
	 6 months (2 cycles per year are completed)). For the quarterly series
	 there are two seasonal frequencies: $\frac{\pi}{2}$ (one cycle per
	 year) and $\pi$ (two cycles per year). A peak at the zero frequency
	 always corresponds to the trend component of the series. The seasonal
	 frequencies are marked as grey vertical lines, while violet lines
	 represent the trading-days frequencies. The trading day frequency is
	 0.348 and derives from the fact that a daily component, which repeats
	 every seven days, goes through 4.348 cycles in a month of an average
	 length of 30.4375 days. It is therefore seen to advance 0.348 cycles
	 per month when the data are obtained at twelve equally spaced times in
	 365.25 days (the average length of a year).

	 Calendar variables are not expected to have a peak neither at a zero
	 frequency nor the seasonal frequencies. The presence and location of
	 the peaks for the calendar variables should be checked when the
	 user-defined calendar variables are considered.

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image6.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**Spectrum for a trading days variable**

6.  Calendar variables can be copied/pasted to an Excel file. To do it,
    open an Excel file and click on the top-left cell in the panel on
    the left and drag and drop the series to the Excel file.

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image7.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**Copying the calendar variables by drag & drop**

7.  A new calendar can be created through the user interface. This is a
    long process that will be described in the next three scenarios.
    Another option to create a calendar is by importing the existing file
    to JDemetra+. To do it, right click on the *Calendar* item from the
    *Workspace* window and choose the *Import* item from the menu.

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image8.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**Importing a calendar to JDemetra+**

8.  The example of the file containing a calendar is presented below.

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image9.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**An example of the *Calendars* file.**

9.  To import the file containing the calendar choose the appropriate
    file and open it.

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image10.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**Choosing the file**

10. JDemetra+ adds the calendar to the list.

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image11.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**A list of calendars with a newly imported calendar**

11. To change the existing calendar click the option *Edit* from the
    context menu, as it has been shown above. JDemetra+ displays the
    list of the holidays that have been defined for this calendar.

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image12.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**Edit a calendar window**

12. To add a holiday to the calendar unfold the \"+\" menu. To remove a
    holiday from the list click on it and choose the \"-\" button. To
    remove the existing holiday from the list, click on it and press the
    \"-\" button. Once all changes are introduced, click *OK*. More
    details the user can find in the [*National calendars*](../case-studies/calendars-national.html) case study.

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image13.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**Removing a holiday from the calendar**

13. To adjust the series for the country-specific calendar effects, the
    appropriate calendar needs to be created. To do it, right click on
    the *Calendar* item from the *Workspace* window and choose the *Add
    Calendar* item from the menu.

	{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

	![Text](/assets/img/user-guide/UG_CAL_image14.jpg)

	{: .text-center.small}

	**Adding a calendar**

	Three options are available here:

	-   *National calendars*, which is appropriate to define a calendar that
		includes country-specific holidays;

	-   *Composite calendars*, which is an option designed for the
		seasonal adjustment of an aggregated time series that is composed
		of national data. It enables the user to create a calendar that is the weighted
		sum of several national calendars.

	-   *Chained calendars*, defined by two national calendars and a break
		date.

	These options are considered in the separate sub-scenarios. Study the ones that match your needs.



[^1]: Trading Days -- seven regression variables, which correspond to
    differences in economic activity between all days of the week and a
    leap year effect; Working Days -- two regression variables, which
    correspond to differences in economic activity between the working
    days (Monday to Friday) and the non-working days (Saturday - Sunday)
    and a leap year effect.
