---
layout: left-menu
title: Autocorrelation function
tagline: technical documentation for JDemetra+ using GitHub Pages
description: Basics
---


**Autocorrelation function**

The correlation is a measure of the strength and the direction of a
linear relationship between two variables. For time series the
correlation can refer to the relation between its observations, e.g.
between the current observation and the observation lagged by a given
number of units. In this case all observations come from one variable,
so similarity between a given time series and a $k$$k$-lagged version of
itself over successive time intervals is called an autocorrelation.

The autocorrelation coefficient at lag $k$ is defined as:

$$\rho\left( k \right) = \frac{\sum_{t = k + 1}^{n}\left( x_{t} - \overline{x} \right)}{\sum_{t = 1}^{n}\left( x_{t} - \overline{x} \right)^{2}}
$$,   \[1\] <!--- \[7.159\]--> 

where:

$x_{t}$ -- time series;

$n$ -- total number of observations;

$\overline{x}$ -- mean of the time series.

The set of autocorrelation coefficients $(k)$ arranged as a function of
$k$ is the autocorrelation function (ACF). The graphical or numerical
representation of the ACF is called autocorrelogram.

{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

![Text](/assets/img/annex/UG_A_image20.png)

{: .text-center.small}

**Autocorrelation function**

The autocorrelation function is a valuable tool for investigating
properties of an empirical time series.[^91] The assessment of the order
of an AR process simply from the sample ACF is not straightforward.
While for a first-order process the theoretical ACF decreases
exponentially and the sample function is expected to have the similar
shape, for the higher-order processes the ACF maybe a mixture of damper
exponential or sinusoidal functions which makes the order of the AR
process difficult to identify.[^92] JDemetra+ displays the values of
autocorrelation function for the residuals from the ARIMA model (see
section [Residuals](..\reference-manual/residuals.html)). The ACF graph (Figure above), presents autocorrelation
coefficients and the confidence intervals. If the autocorrelation
coefficient is in the confidence interval, it is regarded as not
statistically significant. Therefore, the user should focus on the
values where the value of the ACF is outside the confidence interval. In 
JDemetra+ the confidence interval is indicated by two grey, horizontal,
dotted lines.


**Partial autocorrelation function**

The partial autocorrelation is a tool for the identification and
estimation of the ARIMA model. It is defined as the amount of
correlation between two variables which is not explained by their mutual
correlations with a given set of other variables.

Partial autocorrelation at lag $k$ is defined as the autocorrelation
between $x_{t}$ and $x_{t - k}$ that is not accounted for by lags 1
through to $k$-1 which means that correlations with all the elements up
to lag $k$ are removed. Following this definition, partial
autocorrelation for lag 1 is equivalent to autocorrelation.

The partial autocorrelation function (PACF) is the set of partial
autocorrelation coefficients $(k)$ arranged as a function
of $k$. This function can be used to detect the presence of an
autoregressive process in time series and identify the order of this
process. Theoretically, the number of significant lags determines the 
order of the autoregressive process.

{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

![Text](/assets/img/annex/UG_A_image21.png)

{: .text-center.small}

**Partial autocorrelation function**


The PACF graph above, which
is available from the *Tools*$\  \rightarrow \ $*Differencing* menu
presents partial autocorrelation coefficients and the confidence
intervals. If the partial autocorrelation coefficient is in the
confidence interval, it is regarded as statistically not significant.
Therefore, the user should focus on the values where the absolute value
of the PACF is outside the confidence interval. In JDemetra+ the
confidence interval is indicated by two grey, horizontal, dotted lines.

[^91]: MAKRIDAKIS, S., WHEELWRIGHT, S.C., and HYNDMAN, R.J. (1998).

[^92]: CHATFIELD, C. (2004). 