---
layout: left-menu
title: Linearisation with the TRAMO and RegARIMA models
tagline: technical documentation for JDemetra+ using GitHub Pages
description: Basics
---


The primary aim of seasonal adjustment is to remove the unobservable
seasonal component from the observed series. The decomposition routines
implemented in the seasonal adjustment methods make specific assumptions
concerning the input series. One of the crucial assumptions is that the
input series is stochastic, i.e. it is clean of deterministic effects.
Another important limitation derives from the symmetric linear filter
used in TRAMO-SEATS and X-13ARIMA-SEATS. A symmetric linear filter
cannot be applied to the first and last observations with the same set
of weights as for the central observations[^1]. Therefore, for the most
recent observations these filters provide estimates that are subject to
revisions.

To overcome these constrains both seasonal adjustment methods discussed
here include a modelling step that aims to analyse the time series
development and provide a better input for decomposition purposes. The
tool that is frequently used for this purpose is the ARIMA model, as
discussed by BOX, G.E.P., and JENKINS, G.M. (1970). However, time series
are often affected by the outliers, other deterministic effects and
missing observations. The presence of these effects is not in line with
the ARIMA model assumptions. The presence of outliers and other
deterministic effects impede the identification of an optimal ARIMA
model due to the important bias in the estimation of parameters of
[sample autocorrelation functions](../theory/ACF_and_PACF.html) (both global and partial)[^3].
Therefore, the original series need to be corrected for any
deterministic effects and missing observations. This process is called
linearisation and results in the stochastic series that can be modelled
by ARIMA.

For this purpose both TRAMO and RegARIMA use regression models with
ARIMA errors. With these models TRAMO and RegARIMA also produce
forecasts.


  $z_{t} = y_{t}\mathbf{\beta} + x_{t}$,   \[1\] <!--- \[7.5\] -->
  

where:

$z_{t}$ is the original series;

$\mathbf{\beta} = (\beta_{1},\ldots,\beta_{n})$ -- a vector of
regression coefficients;

$y_{t} = (y_{1t},\ldots,y_{\text{nt}})$ -- $\text{n}$ regression
variables (the trading day variables, the leap year effect, outliers,
the Easter effect, ramps, intervention variables, user-defined
variables);

$x_{t}\ $-- a disturbance that follows the general ARIMA process:
$\phi\left( B \right)\delta\left( B \right)x_{t} = \theta(B)a_{t}$;
$\phi\left( B \right)$,$\ \theta(B)$ and $\delta\left( B \right)$ are
the finite polynomials in $B$; $a_{t}$ is a white-noise variable with
zero mean and a constant variance.

The polynomial $\phi\left( B \right)$ is a stationary autoregressive
(AR) polynomial in $B$, which is a product of the stationary regular AR
polynomial in $B$ and the stationary seasonal polynomial
in $\text{B}^{s}$:[^4]

  
  $$\phi\left( B \right) = \phi_{p}\left( B \right)\Phi_{p_{s}}\left( B^{s} \right) = (1 + \phi_{1}B + \ldots + \phi_{p}B^{p})(1 + \Phi_{1}B^{s} + \ldots + \Phi_{p_{s}}B^{p_{s}s})$$  \[2\] <!--- \[7.6\] -->
  

where:

$\text{p}$ -- the number of regular AR terms, (in
JDemetra+$\ \ p \leq 3)$;

$p_{s}$ -- the number of seasonal AR terms, (in
JDemetra+ $p_{s} \leq 1)$;

$\text{s}$ -- the number of observations per year (frequency of the
time series).

The polynomial $\theta(B)$ is an invertible moving average (MA)
polynomial in $B$, which is a product of the invertible regular MA
polynomial in $B$ and the invertible seasonal MA polynomial
in $\text{B}$:

  
  $\theta\left( B \right) = \theta_{q}\left( B \right)\Theta_{q_{s}}\left( B^{s} \right) = (1 + \theta_{1}B + \ldots + \theta_{q}B^{q})(1 + \Theta_{1}B^{s} + \ldots + \Theta_{q_{s}}B^{q_{s}s})$,  \[3\]<!--- \[7.7\] -->


where:

$q$ -- the number of regular MA terms, ($q \leq 3)$;

$q_{s}$ -- the number of seasonal MA terms, ($q_{s} \leq 1)$.

An MA polynomial (1+$\theta_{1}B + \ldots + \theta_{q}B^{q})\ $is
invertible if all its roots lie outside the unit circle, i.e. their
modulus is greater than 1. When invertible an MA process,
$x_{t} = \theta\left( B \right)a_{t},$ can be expressed as

An AR process of infinite order, $\pi\left( B \right)x_{t} = a_{t}$,
where , $\pi\left( B \right) = \pi_{0} + \pi_{1}B + \ldots$ [^5]

The polynomial $\delta\left( B \right)$ is the non-stationary AR
polynomial in $B$ (unit roots):

  
  $\delta\left( B \right) = {(1 - B)}^{d}{(1 - B^{s})}^{d_{s}}$,   \[4\]<!---\[7.8\]-->
  
where:

$d$ -- regular differencing order, ($d \leq 1)$;

$d_{s}\ $-- seasonal differencing order, ($d_{s} \leq 1)$.

JDemetra+ uses notation: $P,\ D,\ Q,BP,\ BD,\ BQ$ instead of,
respectively:$\ p,\ d,q,p_{s},\ d_{s},\ q_{s}$. Therefore, the structure
of the ARIMA$\ (p,\ d,\ q)(P,\ D,\ Q)$ model is denoted in JDemetra+ as
ARIMA $(P,\ D,\ Q)(BP,\ BD,\ BQ)$.

Both TRAMO and X-12-ARIMA allows for an automatic identification of an
ARIMA model extended for the regression variables. The procedure
includes a test for logarithmic transformation (so-called the test for
the log-level specification), selection of the ARIMA model structure and
regressors. The estimated deterministic effects are removed from the
time series to improve the estimation of the time series components.
Forecasts produced by the ARIMA model provide an input for the linear
filters used in the decomposition step. In summary, the application of
an ARIMA model to the original series vastly improves the quality and
stability of the estimated components. The details of the estimation
procedure of the ARIMA model with regression variables are presented in
the later in this section.

Among the deterministic effects one can distinguish between the calendar
effects and outliers. The calendar effects are discussed in the [Calendar effects](../theory/Calendars.html) section. The
impact of different types of outliers on time series is illustrated with
several examples by FRANSES, P.H. (1998) For example, it was explained
that additive outliers, which are described later in this section, yield
large values of skewness and kurtosis, and hence failure of a normality
test. They also increase the standard error of the estimation
parameters. This effect is especially prominent when the size of the
outlier is considerable.

KAISER, R., and MARAVALL, A. (1999) express the impact of the outliers
on the observed series as:[^6]

  
  $y_{t}^{*} = \sum_{j = 1}^{k}\xi_{j}\left( B \right)\omega_{j}I_{t}^{\left( \tau_{j} \right)} + y_{t}$,   \[5\] <!---\[7.9\]-->
 

where:

$y_{t}^{*}$ -- an observed time series;

$y_{t}$ -- a series that follows the ARIMA model;

$\omega_{j}$ -- an initial impact of the outlier at time
${t = \tau}_{j}$;

$I_{t}^{\left( \tau_{j} \right)}$ -- an indicator variable such that is
1 for ${t = \tau}_{j}$ and 0 otherwise;

$\xi_{j}\left( B \right)$ -- an expression that determines the dynamics
of the outlier occurring at time ${t = \tau}_{j}$;

$B$ -- a backshift operator (i.e. $B^{k}X_{t} = X_{t - k}$).

The optimal choice of regression variables (and/or intervention
variables) requires knowledge from the user about the time series being
modelled[^7]. On the contrary, outliers, frequently used in modelling
seasonal economic time series, can be automatically detected by
JDemetra+ (see [Specifiations - TRAMO](../reference-manual/modelling-spec-tramo.html) section for TRAMO and [Specifiations - ARIMA](../reference-manual/modelling-spec-arima.html) section for RegARIMA). The
procedure described in GÃ“MEZ, V., and MARAVALL, A. (2001a) identifies
the ARIMA model structure in the presence of deterministic effects.
Therefore, the number of identified outliers may depend on the ARIMA
model estimated on the series.

The types of outliers that can be automatically identified and estimated
by JDemetra+ without any user intervention are:

-   Additive Outlier (AO) -- a point outlier which occurs at a given
     time $t_0$. For the additive outlier
     $\xi_{j}( B) = 1$, which results in the regression
     variable:

  
  $$
  AO_{t}^{t_{0}} = 
  \begin{cases}   
  1  \text{ for }  t = t_{0} \\\\                              
  0  \text{ for }  t \neq t_{0}                            
  \end{cases}
  $$;              \[6\] <!---\[7.10\]-->           
  

-   Level shift (LS) -- a variable for a constant level shift beginning
     at the given time $t_{0}$. For the level shift
     $\xi_{j}\left( B \right) = \frac{1}{1 - B}$, which results in the
     regression variable:

  $$
  LS_{t}^{t_{0}} = 
  \begin{cases}   
  -1  \text{ for }  t < t_{0} \\\\                              
  0  \text{ for }  t \geq t_{0}                            
  \end{cases}
  $$;              \[7\] <!---\[7.11\]-->
                          
  

-   Temporary change[^8] (TC) -- a variable for an effect on the given
     time $t_{0}$ that decays exponentially over the following
     periods. For the temporary change
     $\xi_{j}\left( B \right) = \frac{1}{1 - \delta B}$, which results
     in the regression variable:

  $$
  TC_{t}^{t_{0}} = 
  \begin{cases}   
  0  \text{ for }  t < t_{0} \\\\                              
  \alpha^{t - t_{0}}  \text{ for }  t \geq t_{0}                            
  \end{cases}
  $$;               \[8\]<!---\[7.12\]-->
                         
  

> where $\alpha$ is a rate of decay back to the previous level
> $(0 < \alpha < 1)$.

-   Seasonal outliers (SO) -- a variable that captures an abrupt change
     in the seasonal pattern on the given date $t_{0}\ $and maintains
     the level of the series with a contrasting change spread over the
     remaining periods. It is modelled by the regression variable:

  
  $$
  SO_{t}^{t_{0}} = 
  \begin{cases}   
  0  \text{ for }  t < t_{0} \\\\                              
  1  \text{ for }  t \geq t_{0}, \text{$t$ same month/quarter as $t_{0}$}   \\\\                    \frac{- 1}{(s - 1)} \text{ otherwise}       
  \end{cases}
  $$;               \[9\] <!---\[7.13\]-->
                             
  

where $s$ is a frequency of the time series ($s = 12\ $for a monthly
time series, $s = 4\ $for a quarterly time series).

The shapes generated by the formulas given above are presented in the figure below.

{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

![Text]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/annex/UG_A_image1.png)

{: .text-center.small}

**Pre-defined outliers built in to JDemetra+**

Within the RegARIMA model it can be also tested if a series of level
shifts cancels out to form a temporary level change effect, which is a
permanent level shift spanned between two given dates. It is modelled by
the regression variable:

  $$
  TLS_{t}^{ {(t}_{0}{,\ t}_{1})} =
  \begin{cases}   
  0  \text{ for }  t < t_{0} \\\\                              
  1  \text{ for }  t_{1} \geq t \geq t_{0}   \\\\                    
  0 \text{ for } t > t_{1}       
  \end{cases}
  $$;               \[10\]<!---\[7.14\]-->
                                           
  

JDemetra+ also identifies other pre-defined regression variables, for
which a necessary input, such as location and process that generates the
variable, is provided by the user. This group includes:

-   Ramp -- a variable for a linear increase or decrease in the level of
    the series over a specified time interval $t_{0}$ to$\ t_{1}$. It is
    modelled by a regression variable:

$$
  RP_{t}^{ {(t}_{0}{,\ t}_{1})} =
  \begin{cases}   
 -1 \text{ for } t \leq t_{0} \\\\                              
 -\frac{t - t_{0}}{t_{1} - t_{0}} - 1 \text{ for } t_{0} < t < t_{1}   \\\\    0 \text{ for } t \geq t_{1}       
  \end{cases}
  $$;               \[11\] <!---\[7.15\]-->
                                             


   Intervention variables which are combinations of five basic structures[^9]:

<!-- -->

-   dummy variables[^10];

-   any possible sequence of ones and zeros;

-   $\frac{1}{(1 - \delta B)}$, $(0 < \delta \leq 1)$;

-   $\frac{1}{(1 - \delta_{s}B^{s})}$, $(0 < \delta_{s} \leq 1)$;

-   $\frac{1}{(1 - B)(1 - B^{s})}$;

where $s$ is frequency of the time series ($s = 12\ $for a monthly time
series, $s = 4\ $for a quarterly time series).

The structures considered by intervention variables allow for generation
of all pre-defined outliers described by \[6\] -- \[11\], as well
as some more sophisticated effects. An example can be a level shift
effect reached after a sequence of damped overshootings and
undershootings, presented in the figure below and denoted there as IV. Another
example of an outlier that can be created with intervention variables is
a pure seasonal outlier ($PSO)$, which, in contrast to the seasonal
outlier described above, does not affect the trend. The set of pure
seasonal outliers is used to model the seasonal change of regime
($\text{SCR}$) effect, which describes a sudden and sustained change in
the seasonal pattern affecting from $t_{0}$ (possibly) all seasons of
the series. It is defined as:

  $$
  SCR_{i,j} =
  \begin{cases}   
 1 \text{ for } t \epsilon j \text{ and } t < t_{0} \\\\                    
 0 \text{ for } t \notin j \text{ or } t \geq t_{0} \\\\    
 -1 \text{ for } t \epsilon s \text{ and } t < t_{0}       
  \end{cases}
  $$;               \[12\]<!---\[7.16\]-->
                     

where $j = 1,\ldots s - 1$.

{: .text-center.image-wrapper}

![Text]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/annex/UG_A_image2.png)

{: .text-center.small}

**Examples of intervention variables**

#### Automatic model identification procedure in TRAMO

An algorithm for Automatic Model Identification in the Presence of
Outliers (AMI) implemented in TRAMO is based on TSAY, C. (1986) and
CHEN, B.-C., and LIU, L.-M. (1993) with some modifications (see GÃ“MEZ,
V., and MARAVALL, A. (2001)). It iterates between two stages: the first
is automatic outlier detection and correction and the second automatic
model identification. The parameters of the AMI procedure are described
in the [Specifiations - ARIMA](../reference-manual/modelling-spec-arima.html) section. Unless the parameters are set by the user the program runs
with the default values.

The algorithm starts with the identification of the default model and
pre-testing procedure, where on the first step a test for a log-level
specification is performed. It is based on the maximum likelihood
estimation of the parameter $\lambda$ in the Box-Cox transformation,
which is a power transformation such that the transformed values of the
time series $y\ $are a monotonic function of the observations, i.e.
$$
  y^{\alpha} =
  \begin{cases}   
 \frac{\left( y_{i}^{\alpha} - 1 \right)}{\lambda}, \lambda \neq 0 \\\\       \log{y_{i}^{\alpha}, \lambda = 0}       
  \end{cases}
  $$; 

First, two Airline models (i.e. ARIMA(0,1,1)(0,1,1)) with a mean) are fitted to the time series: one in logs
($\lambda = 0$), other without logs ($\lambda = 1$). The test compares
the sum of squares of the model without logs with the sum of squares
multiplied by the square of the geometric mean of the (regularly and
seasonally) differenced series in the case of the model in logs. Logs
are taken in the case this last function is the minimum[^11]. By
default, both TRAMO and X-12-ARIMA have a slight bias towards the log
transformation.

Next, the test for calendar effects is performed with regressions using
the default model for the noise and, if the model is subsequently
changed, the test is redone. For seasonal series the default model is
the Airline model (ARIMA (0,1,1)(0,1,1)) while for the non-seasonal
series ARIMA (0,1,1)(0,0,0) with a constant term is used. The default
model, which is used as a benchmark model at some next steps of AMI, is
determined by the result of the pre-test for possible presence of
seasonality.

Once these pre-tests have been completed, the original series is
corrected for all pre-specified outliers and regression effects provided
by the user, if any. Next, the order of the differencing
polynomial $\text{Î´}\left( B \right)$Â­ that contains the unit roots is
identified and it is decided whether to specify a mean for the series or
not. The identification of the ARMA model, i.e. the order of
$\phi\left( B \right)\ $and $\text{Î¸}\left( B \right)\ $ Â­is performed
using the Hannan and Rissanen method by the means of minimising the
Bayesian information criterion with some constraints aimed at increasing
the parsimony and favouring balanced models[^12]. This procedure
produces the initial values of the ARIMA model parameters. The search is
done sequentially: for the fixed regular polynomials, the seasonal ones
are obtained, and vice versa. When the estimated roots of the AR and MA
processes are close to each other, [the order of the ARIMA model can be
reduced](../theory/SA_lin.html#cancellation-of-ar-and-ma-factors). 
The identification and estimation of the model is carried
out using Exact Maximum Likelihood (EML) or the Unconditional Least
Squares method.

If the calendar effects were identified in the default model, they are
included in a new ARIMA model provided that these effects are
significant for this model. The estimated residuals from the modified
ARIMA model with fixed parameters and the median absolute deviation of
the standard deviation of these residuals are used in the outlier
detection procedure. For each observation, $t$-tests are computed for
all types of outlier considered in the automatic procedure (AO, TC, LS,
SO), following the procedure proposed in CHEN, B.-C., and LIU, L.-M.
(1993). The program compares$\text{t}$-statistics to a critical value
determined by the series length. If there are outliers, for which the
absolute $t$-values are greater than a critical value, the one with the
greatest absolute$\text{t}$-value is selected. After correcting for
the identified outlier, the process is started again to test if there is
another outlier. The procedure is repeated until for none of the
potential outliers, the $t$-statistic exceeds the critical value. If
outliers are detected, then a multiple regression is performed using the
Kalman filter and the [QR algorithm](../theory/SA_lin.html#least-squares-estimation-by-means-of-the-qr-decomposition)
 to avoid (as much as possible)
masking effects (i.e. detecting spurious outliers) and to correct for
the bias produced in the estimators sequentially obtained[^3]. If there
are outliers for which the absolute $t$-values are greater than the
critical value, the one with the greatest absolute $t$-value is selected
and the algorithm continues to the estimation of the ARMA model
parameters. Otherwise, the algorithm stops[^16]. The estimated residuals
from the final ARIMA model are checked for adequacy against the
estimated residuals produced by the balanced model. The final model
identified by the AMI procedure must show some improvement over the
default model in these residual diagnostics; otherwise, the program will
accept the default model[^7].

#### Automatic model identification procedure in RegARIMA

The original RegARIMA algorithm developed by the U.S. Census Bureau
includes two automatic model selection procedures: *automdl* that is
based on TRAMO and *pickmdl* that originates from X-11-ARIMA[^18]. The
algorithm implementation in JDemetra+ for RegARIMA follows the TRAMO
logic. It is very similar to the TRAMO procedure presented in the
previous section, but contains modifications to make use of the
X-13ARIMA-SEATS estimation procedure, which is different from the one
that TRAMO uses[^7]. The examples of extensions that are specific to
RegARIMA only are: special treatment of the leap year effect in the
multiplicative model, automatic detection of the length of the Easter
effect[^20], option to reduce a series of level shifts to the temporary
level shift. In comparison with TRAMO, there are also differences in the
values of the default parameters. Besides, by default, RegARIMA does not
favour balanced models. The log/level test in RegARIMA is based on the
[Corrected Akaike Information Criterion (AICC)](../theory/SA_lin.html#model-selection-criteria). Similarly, the
estimation of calendar effects is based on AICC. As a result, the model
selected by RegARIMA can differ from the model that TRAMO would select,
especially in the case of series contaminated with some deterministic
effects and/or those, which are modelled with the mixed ARIMA models.

#### Model selection criteria

Model selection criteria are statistical tools for selecting the optimal
order of the ARIMA model. The basic idea behind all these criteria is to
obtain as much explanatory power (measured by the value of the
likelihood function) with only a few parameters. The model selection
criteria essentially choose the model with the best fit, as measured by
the likelihood function, and it is a subject to a penalty term, to
prevent over-fitting that increases with the number of parameters in the
model.[^22] Some of the most well-known information criteria are: Akaike
Information Criterion (AIC)[^23], Corrected Akaike Information Criterion
(AICC)[^24], HQ Information Criterion (HannanQuinn)[^25] and
Schwarz-Bayes Information Criterion (BIC)[^26].

The formulae for the model selection criteria used by JDemetra+ are:

  $$
  AIC_{N} = -2L_{N} + {2n}_{p}
  $$                                          \[13\]<!---\[7.17\]-->
  

$$
AICC_{N} = - 2L_{N} + 2n_{p}\left( 1 - \frac{n_{p} + 1}{N} \right)^{- 1}
$$   \[14\]<!---\[7.18\]-->

$$
HQ_{N} = - 2L_{N} + 2n_{p}\text{ln(ln(N))}
$$                         \[15\]<!---\[7.19\]-->

$$
BIC_{N} = - 2L_{N} + n_{p}\text{logN}
$$                           \[16\]<!---\[7.20\]-->

where:

$\text{N}$-- a number of observations in time series;

$n_{p}$ -- a number of estimate parameters;

$L_{N}$ -- a loglikelihood function.

For each model selection criteria the model with the smaller value is
preferred. As it can be shown that AIC is biased for small samples, it
is often replaced by AICC. To choose the ARIMA model parameters the
original RegARIMA uses AICC while TRAMO uses BIC with some constraints
aimed at increasing the parsimony and favouring balanced models. The
automatic model identification methods implemented in JDemetra+ mostly
use BIC, however other criteria are used as well. It should be noted
that the BIC criterion imposes a greater penalty term than AIC and HQ,
so that BIC tends to select simpler models than those chosen by AIC. The
difference between both criteria can be huge if $N$ is large[^27].

#### Hannan-Rissanen algorithm

The Hannan-Rissanen algorithm[^28] is a penalty function method based on
the BIC criterion, where the estimates of the ARMA model parameters are
computed by means of a linear regression. The Hannan-Rissanen procedure
operates on a stationary transformation of the original series,
therefore only AR and MA parameters are being identified.

In the first step, a high-order$\ AR(m)$, where $m > max(p,q)$, model is
fitted to the time series $X_{t}$. The maximum order of $p$ and $q$ is
given a-priori. In JDemetra+ it is equal to 3 for both $p$ and
$q$. The residuals $$\widehat{a}_{k}$$ from this model are used
to provide estimates of the innovations in the ARMA model $a_{t}$:

  
  $$a_{t} = X_{t} - \sum_{k = 1}^{m}{\widehat{a}_{k}X}_{t - k}$$   \[17\]<!---\[7.21\]-->
  

In the second step the parameters $p$ and $q$ of the ARMA model are
estimated using a least squares linear regression of $X_{t}$ onto
$X_{t - 1},\ldots X_{t - p},a_{t - 1},\ldots a_{t - q}$ for a
combination of values $p$ and $q$. The first step of the procedure is
skipped if the ARMA model fitted in the second step includes only an
autoregressive part.

Finally, the Hannan-Rissanen algorithm selects a pair of $p$ and $q$
values for which $BIC_{p,q}$ is the smallest. $BIC_{p,q}$
is defined as:

 
  $$\text{BIC}_{p,q} = \log\left( \sigma_{p,q}^{2} \right) + \frac{\left( p + q \right)\log\left( n - d \right)}{n - d}$$   \[18\]<!---\[7.22\]-->


where:

$\sigma_{p,q}^{2}$ is the maximum likelihood estimator of $\sigma^{2}$;

$n - d\ $is the number of series in the (regularly and/or) seasonally
differenced series.

The advantage of the Hannan-Rissanen algorithm is the speed of
computation in comparison with an exact likelihood estimation.

#### Initial values for ARIMA model estimation

By default, the initial parameter value in X-13ARIMA-SEATS is 0.1 for
all AR and MA parameters. For the majority of time series this default
value seems to be appropriate. Introducing better initial values (as
might be obtained, e.g., by first fitting the model using conditional
likelihood) could slightly speed up a convergence. Users are allowed to
introduce manually initial values for AR and MA parameters that are then
used to start the iterative likelihood maximization. This is rarely
necessary, and, in general, not recommended. A possible exception to
this occurs if the initial estimates that are likely to be extremely
accurate are already available, such as when one is re-estimating a
model with a small amount of new data added to a time series. However,
the main reason for specifying initial parameter values is to deal with
convergence problems that may arise in difficult estimation
situations[^7].

#### Cancellation of AR and MA factors

A cancellation issue consists in cancelling some factors on both sides
of the ARIMA model. This problem concerns the mixed ARIMA
$(p,d,q)(P,D,Q)$ models (i.e. $p > 0\ $and$\ q > 0$, or $P > 0$ and
$Q > 0$). For example, a cancellation problem occurs with ARMA (1,1)
model, $\left( 1 - \phi B \right)z_{t} = (1 - \theta B)a_{t}$ when
$\phi = \theta\ $as then model is simply of the form: $z_{t} = a_{t}$.
Such model causes problems with convergence of the nonlinear estimation.
For this reason the X-13ARIMA-SEATS and TRAMO-SEATS programs deal with a
cancellation problem by computing zeros of the AR and MA polynomials. As
the cancellation does not need to be exact, the cancellation limit can
be provided by the user[^7].

#### Least squares estimation by means of the QR decomposition

We consider the regression model:


  $y = X\beta + \varepsilon$   \[19\]<!---\[7.23\]-->
  

The least squares problem consists in minimizing the quantity
$\left\| X\beta - y \right\|^{2}$.

Provided that the regression variables are independent, it is possible
to find an orthogonal matrix $Q$, so that $Q \bullet X = \left( \frac{R}{0} \right)$ where $R$ is upper
triangular. 

We have now to minimize:

  $$\left\| QX\beta - Qy \right\|_{2}^{2} = \left\|                                                  
  \left( \frac{R}{0} \right)                                                                                       
  \ \beta - Qy \right\|_{2}^{2} = \left\| R\beta - a \right\|_{2}^{2} + \left\| b \right\|_{2}^{2}$$   \[20\]<!---\[7.24\]-->
  

where $Qy_{0\ldots x - 1} = a$ and
$Qy_{x\ldots n - 1} = b$.

The minimum of the previous norm is obtained by setting
$\beta = R^{- 1}a$. In that case
$\left\| R\ \beta - a \right\|_{2}^{2} = 0$. The residuals obtained by
this procedure are then $b$, as defined above.

It should be noted that the $\text{QR}$ factorization is not unique, and
that the final residuals also depend on the order of the regression
variables (the columns of $X$).



[^1]: DAGUM, E.B. (1980).
[^3]: GÃ“MEZ, V., and MARAVALL, A. (2001b).
[^4]: The notation used by TRAMO for the polynomials is different from the one commonly used in the literature, for example in HAMILTON, J.D. (1994) the AR polynomial is denoted as .
[^5]: BOX G.E.P., JENKINS, G.M., and REINSEL, G.C. (2007).
[^6]: KAISER, R., and MARAVALL, A. (1999).
[^7]: â€˜X-13ARIMA-SEATS Reference Manualâ€™ (2015).
[^8]: In the TRAMO-SEATS method this type of outlier is called a transitory change.
[^9]: GÃ“MEZ, V., and MARAVALL, A. (1997).
[^10]: Dummy variable is the variable that takes the values 0 or 1 to indicate the absence or presence of some effect.
[^11]: GÃ“MEZ, V., and MARAVALL, A. (2010).
[^12]: Parsimonious models are those which have a great deal of explanatory power using a relatively small number of parameters. Balanced models are models for which the order of the combined AR and differencing operators is equal to the order of the combined MA operator (see GÃ“MEZ, V., and MARAVALL, A. (1997)). A model is said to be more balanced than a competing model if the absolute difference between the total orders of the AR plus differencing and MA operators is smaller for one model than another. For description of the Hannan-Rissanen algorithm see he respective section above, a well as HANNAN, E.J., and RISSANEN, J. (1982), GÃ“MEZ, V., and MARAVALL, A. (2001b).
[^15]: GÃ“MEZ, V., and MARAVALL, A. (2001b).
[^16]: MARAVALL, A. (2000).
[^17]: â€˜X-13ARIMA-SEATS Reference Manualâ€™ (2015).
[^18]: DAGUM, E.B. (1988).
[^19]: â€˜X-13ARIMA-SEATS Reference Manualâ€™ (2015).
[^20]: The pre-tested options are: one, eight, and fifteen days before Easter.
[^22]: CHATFIELD, C. (2004).
[^23]: AKAIKE, H. (1973).
[^24]: HURVICH, C.M., and TSAI, C. (1989).
[^25]: HANNAN, E.J., and QUINN, B.G. (1979).
[^26]: SCHWARZ, G. (1978).
[^27]: PEÃ‘A, D. (2001).
[^28]: HANNAN, E.J., and RISSANEN, J. (1982), NEWBOLD, D., and BOS, T. (1982).
[^29]: â€˜X-13ARIMA-SEATS Reference Manualâ€™ (2015).
[^30]: â€˜X-13ARIMA-SEATS Reference Manualâ€™ (2015).